- Advanced Namespace Tools for 9front -

This is a toolkit of additions and modifications to Plan 9.  It is
designed to make Plan 9 installations, on single machines or on
networks, more flexible.  ANTS has:

* A modified boot process which creates an isolated administrative
namespace independent of any root fileserver.

* A modified kernel which accepts manipulation of process namespace
via writes of standard namespace operations to the /proc/PID/ns files

* Kernel mod and rc patch to allow rfork V into a new /srv namespace

* Scripts for moving between and systematically altering namespaces
such as "rerootwin" which is similar to chroot in unix and keeps the
terminal devices at /mnt/term active.

* Optional fossil/venti support with administrative scripts for
progressive backup/replication and maintaining a log of rootscores

* Hubfs 9p fs for networked persistent shell sessions and a
lightweight general purpose multiclient read/write buffered message
queue with pipelike hubfiles

* Grio modified Rio with customizable appearance for color-coded
namespace grouping, user-selectable additional menu command, and hubfs
integration

* Script toolkits for the services provided by 9gridchan.org projects
such as the public 9p grid and the Spawngrid, as well as hypercubic
timewarp simuation.

Most of these components are synergistic, but not interdependent.  The
userspace programs and utilities do not generally depend on using the
modified ANTS kernel.

- Installing on 9front from source -

Check that your 9front hg revision matched up with a compatible ANTS
revision.  Tested ANTS/9front revisions are listed in the
INSTALLING file.The build script has a variety of possible targets.  A
basic sequence:

	# compile everything but install nothing yet
	build 9front
	# install userspace components but not kernel/9fat
	build fronthost 
	# copy new kernel and tools to 9fat partition
	9fs 9fat && cp 9ants /n/9fat && cp tools.tgz /n/9fat
	# add one line to /rc/bin/termrc for gui/terminal service
	echo 'home=/usr/$user; cd; . $home/lib/profile' >>/rc/bin/termrc
	# edit plan9.ini
	acme /n/9fat/plan9.ini
	
To allow you to select between kernels at boot, you can set bootfile=
in plan9.ini to not provide a value.  Then at boot you will have to
type "bootfile=9ants" or "bootfile=9pc" (assuming that is your
original kernel name) and then "boot".  You may want to set
"bootcmd=plan9rc".  if you set "privpassword=" to something in
plan9.ini, a cpu listener on port 17060 will be started to allow
hostowner cpu/drawterm to the ants boot/admin namespace.
cfg/plan9.ini has a minimal example that works with a fresh cwfs
install to a qemu vm.

You may also wish to change "rio" to "grio" in your profile.

- Using 9front/ANTS -

The behavior of the standard user namespace should be unchanged, apart
from the use of grio rather rio if desired.  To access the special
service namespace, either rcpu in (the default port is 17060) or, if
using a terminal system, via /srv/hubfs connected to a peristent shell
in that namespace. From within the service namespace, you may
enter the standard namespace with this sequence:

	rerootwin -f boot
	service=con
	. $home/lib/profile

With bootcmd=plan9rc set in plan9.ini, ANTS supports additional boot
options, such as fossil+venti (requires installing fossil,
partitioning hard drive correctly, and setting plan9.ini options.) or
fully interactive boot with prompts for all options (with
interactive=yes in plan9.ini).

Additional documentation found in the INSTALLING file and in the doc/
subdirectory.
