# Advanced Namespace Tools blog 

### 21 November 2018

## Setting up an ANTS spawngrid

This post describes work-in-progress. If you are interested in the current status, stop in to gridchat on the 9gridchan public grid.

### Install and update ANTS/9front on two vultr nodes

I start by spinng up two 2gb ram vultr instances and installing from the latest ants/9front isos. I choose cpu server setup for one, and start with terminal mode for the other, which i will change later. I enable private networking and name then eusto1 and eucpu1. After installing and removing the cd image and rebooting, i can cpu in. I do so and enter a hub called uphub to work in - this gives me remote persistence and also improves latency by indirecting the shell i/o.

	sysupdate
	cd /sys/src/ants
	hg pull
	hg update
	rm frontmods/include/libc.rebuild.complete
	build 9front
	build fronthost
	cp grid/* /rc/bin
	bind -b '#S' /dev
	9fs 9fat
	cp 9ants64 /n/9fat
	cp tools.tgz /n/9fat
	fshalt -r

I rebooted to test the new kernel, all was good. Time for a few more config changes. Editing the /lib/namespace file I added

	bind -c #z /zrv

To make use of the ants non-forkable zrv device. I also add

	bind -a #l1 /net.alt
	bind -a #I1 /net.alt

to make use of the private vultr network. A bit more on that is that I want the venti to be listening on that private network to communicate with any other of my servers in the same datacenter, so i will make some edits to the boot process to set this up.

	bootfile=9ants64
	bootcmd=plan9rc
	nobootprompt=local!/dev/sdF0/fossil 
	service=cpu
	venti=#S/sdF0/arenas /net.alt/tcp!*!17034
	mouseport=ps2intellimouse
	monitor=vesa
	vgasize=800x600x16
	sysname=eusto1
	afterfact=/x/altnet
	altaddr=10.6.16.31
	user=glenda

The altnet script:

	#!/bin/rc
	bind -b '#l1' /net.alt
	bind -b '#I1' /net.alt
	ip/ipconfig -x /net.alt ether /net.alt/ether1 $altaddr 255.255.0.0
	ip/ipconfig -x /net.alt loopback /dev/null 127.1
	echo mtu 1450 >/net.alt/ipifc/0/ctl

Reboot again and all is good. I repeated this process to set up a similar node eucpu1.

### Grid setup and config

	eusto1% aux/listen1 -tv tcp!*!17034 tlssrv -A /bin/aux/trampoline /net.alt/tcp!127.1!17034

	contest4% aux/listen1 -tv tcp!127.1!27034 /bin/tlsclient -a tcp!eusto1!17034

	contest4% 9fs 9fat
	contest4% cd /n/9fat
	contest4% webfs
	contest4% echo 'venti=tcp!127.1!27034' >eusto1.info
	contest4% ventiprog -f eusto1.info

	eusto1% echo 111 >/tmp/stononce

compiling safehubfs and touch644 and editing scorefns.makectlhub on eusto1

create /n/9fat/scorenames from older version seed in new ndb format

update /lib/ndb/local on both eu machines and my local client

### starting up score/spawn service

	eusto1% mkdir /usr/grid
	eusto1% . /rc/bin/scorefns
	eusto1% storageinit
	eusto1% hub authcheck
	creating hubfs /srv/authcheck
	io% aux/listen1 -v tcp!*!16999 /bin/tlssrv -a /bin/userreq

	eucpu1% . /rc/bin/scorefns
	eucpu1% srvscores
	eucpu1% rimport eusto1 /srv /n/sto
	eucpu1% startcpusvc

### venti block and score db synchronization

ventiprog -f otherserver.info on both sides, possibly run like while(sleep 3600){ventiprog -f infofile &} in a hub

	rimport remote /srv /n/remote
	mount /n/remote/fatsrv /n/remote9fat
	9fs 9fat
	scorecopy

while(sleep whatever)scorecopy in a hub of course

or cron jobs.

### client usage

add server information to ndb

	term% rimport eusto1 /srv /n/eusrv
	term% mount /n/eusrv/gridsvc /n/g
	term% gridorc -u rabbit -d tcp!eusto1!16999

inside gridorc:

scores
spawn scorename
use final printed rcpu command in a separate window to access
save oldname newname # names are immutable, no changes are saved unless you save a new name
invite user name # invite a user to be able to spawn a copy of a currently running environment
status # list currently active environments
boom name # destroy environment
