There comes a time when it is necessary to make your position known,
and for me that time has arrived.  I want to make it clear where I
stand, and why.

I am absolutely and unalterably opposed to racism, sexism, homophobia,
transphobia, nationalism, ethnocentrism, religious fundamentalism, and
oppressive and coercive power structures of all kinds.

I am absolutely in favor of acceptance of human diversity and peaceful
intercombinations of cultures and ethnicities.

I oppose violence by individuals and by governments save as a last
resort of self-defence against immediate physical danger in both
cases.

I am in favor of free and open communications, including ideas which
may be offensive, but excluding exploitation of children,
nonconsensual invasions of bodily privacy, and nonconsensual sadistic
treatment of people or animals except as necessary to expose and
prosecute those guilty of these acts.

I believe in sexual freedom as long as consent and boundaries are
appropriately respected.  I believe in the freedom to alter one's own
consciousness as one chooses as long as harm is not done to others.

I believe in cooperative democratic community governance to maximize
the well-being of individuals, so long as the above principles are not
violated.

I find it necessary to state these things explicity, because Bad Shit
has gotten way, way out of hand, and I want to do my part to promote
peace and love and toler-ants.  I also have the selfish motivation to
prevent any possible confusions based on my existence within the -chan
namespace.

I want to be clear that i am not "disowning" associations with -chan
culture.  I'm fighting to try to save it.  There have always been
Unfortunate Aspects of imageboard culture, but 4chan in the mid 2000s
was an amazing place and I think it is important to stand up and say
that NOT all of us who were there - and not all of us who may be there
still - were or are disgusting racist pedophile white nationalists.
Some of us have been fighting against that bullshit from when it
mostly masqueraded as humor and jokes to now when it has become
perilously close to a dominant ideology in some pol-aces.

Be excellent to each other.
